[Unknown]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Once there was a boy in a slum. You'd think he was a bum because he was a boy in a slum.
[Amit Varma]: But his mind was burning as the earth was turning and the world was churning and in the center of it stood this boy in a slum.
[Amit Varma]: A social activist came to the slum and said to the boy, you're looking glum. Why do you look so sad?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, this slum must be so bad. It really makes me mad. I wish I could send you back to where you're from.
[Amit Varma]: This amused the boy from the slum. He said, I gotta say you're pretty dumb.
[Amit Varma]: The reason I came here was I prefer it to there. That life I could not bear.
[Amit Varma]: And this I do declare that I will beat only to my own drum.
[Amit Varma]: Once a posh kid met the boy from the slum. He said, you slum dwellers, you're all scum.
[Amit Varma]: With a smile and not a frown, a boy looked him up and down and said, good afternoon.
[Amit Varma]: You're trapped in your cocoon. Now this may astound you, confuse you and confound you.
[Amit Varma]: But look, there's an invisible city all around you. Your independence is just for show.
[Amit Varma]: You need me more than you know. Right now, I'm just a boy in a slum.
[Amit Varma]: But you don't know what I could become.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, my weekly show on the seen and unseen effects of public policy.
[Amit Varma]: My subject for today is slums. Now slums in India are both demonized and deified.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, people look down on them as centers of filth and squalor and eyesore to the city.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, they're praised as hotbeds of innovation and entrepreneurship.
[Amit Varma]: Beyond these two simplistic notions, both of which are true, lies a much more fundamental role that a slum plays in a city.
[Amit Varma]: To shed light on this, I have with me on the show Pawan Srinath, a policy analyst at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore and a frequent guest on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the show, Pawan.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me back.
[Guest]: Pawan, tell me something about slums.
[Guest]: So typically slums have been seen in India as a blot on the urban landscape, right?
[Guest]: So they're these things that shouldn't exist. They're aberrations and anomalies, right?
[Guest]: At best, people look at them as these hubs of poverty and inequality.
[Guest]: And, you know, if pushed to say what are good things about a slum, someone might say, you know, at least they're a source of cheap labor.
[Guest]: They're the reason why labor costs are kept down in the city. That's pretty much what people think about a slum.
[Amit Varma]: And in recent times, there's also the move away from one extreme of demonizing it to the other extreme of deifying it.
[Amit Varma]: Saying that, look at Dharavi, it's such a hub of entrepreneurship and innovation and so on.
[Guest]: And Jugaad.
[Amit Varma]: And Jugaad, exactly.
[Guest]: So what is happening now is, you know, you're making a virtue out of a necessity, right?
[Guest]: These are things that exist that were long denigrated. So now let's put them on a pedestal.
[Guest]: The reality of what a slum does is it allows for entry into cities at every single price point.
[Guest]: You as a person, you can have 10 rupees in your pocket.
[Guest]: You can have 10,000 rupees in your pocket.
[Guest]: You are now able to come into an Indian city and somehow struggle and, you know, start off.
[Guest]: The struggle is still immense.
[Guest]: But remember that we are still India.
[Guest]: India has slums because we have freedom of movement in this country.
[Guest]: And that's a powerful force.
[Guest]: You look at some place like China where you have a resident system called hukou.
[Guest]: So you have half or a third of urban residents who are illegal.
[Guest]: You don't even have basic rights.
[Guest]: In India, we don't have that.
[Guest]: Obviously, access to basic services and so on is still very limited.
[Guest]: But you have the freedom to go where you want.
[Guest]: So you have the freedom to make a personal sacrifice, be crazy enough to give up a life back home and move to a city,
[Guest]: struggle, you know, take a hit on health, on dignity and so on.
[Guest]: Why? So that, you know, you can give your next generation a slightly better chance at prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: We tend to be so condescending about people who live in slums and all, look at their poor lot.
[Amit Varma]: But it's important to note that all of them prefer being in a slum to being back wherever they came from.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: You have far more movement of people from villages to slums and cities rather than from slums to villages,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, if you look at the Gandhian view of the idyllic village life, that's sort of what you'd expect.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're really saying is that slums, therefore, have that social good that they allow this mobility.
[Amit Varma]: Anyone can come into a city at any point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And you have a place where you can go and stay and where you can then, that's a base for your struggles.
[Amit Varma]: How does this impact the policy thinking behind slums?
[Amit Varma]: Like over time, because of these different views that we have of slums,
[Amit Varma]: you will often have the elite sort of proposing that we need to do away with slums, that look at the extremes of wealth that you see,
[Amit Varma]: that someone's flying into Bombay airport and the first thing you see is the slums and we need to do something about that.
[Amit Varma]: And their other argument is that slums form a vote bank from politicians who benefit from keeping poor people in slums, making sure they stay poor in slums.
[Guest]: So there's a status quo in the provision of services, especially because, supposing you don't have piped water supply in a slum,
[Guest]: the person who's bringing a truck over, a water tanker over, can visibly show patronage as doing good for members who live in that slum.
[Guest]: So absolutely, but while that is there, the old idea in India was get your slums cleared out of the city.
[Guest]: So you had slum clearance boards and the idea was you get rid of the area, get rid of the people,
[Guest]: maybe provide housing in some corner of the city outside where real estate costs are low,
[Guest]: completely uprooting people from the local economic livelihoods that they were in, the economy that they were a part of.
[Guest]: Thankfully, that thinking is slowly dying. At least now people are talking about in-situ development.
[Amit Varma]: So why is it slowly dying? What have people learnt?
[Guest]: So one of the things people have learnt is, look, people, unless they have jobs, they have no business in a city.
[Guest]: People come to the city for jobs. So in the act of giving them better housing and better amenities,
[Guest]: if you're killing the jobs, then you're not helping anyone.
[Guest]: Because people are more politically empowered, even in slums today, that they've been able to resist such moves.
[Guest]: Having said that, so now the idea is, let's do redevelopment within the site.
[Guest]: And this is better than the alternative. But even this has a lot of problems.
[Guest]: You're still thinking about slums from a, you know, land, property rights, titling type of a regime,
[Guest]: rather than this point of how do you allow people to come into a city at every single price point.
[Guest]: So the idea is access and an entry point rather than, OK, here are people who are already sort of living here informally.
[Guest]: So let's formalize how they're living, give them some land, give them some property so that they can develop.
[Amit Varma]: So explain this to me. If you have in-situ development of a slum, and what was a slum instead,
[Amit Varma]: you have apartment blocks, cheap apartment blocks where the people stay, that immediately drives the price up.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the cheap access that say someone coming from a village to the slum had no longer exists.
[Guest]: It exists to somewhat the same extent, you know. So supposing that you were members in a particular slum,
[Guest]: and then the slum was redeveloped, more housing was added.
[Guest]: So now you might own some of this, or you might have a lease over some of this.
[Guest]: You might want to give this away as for rent to someone else. So you might go live somewhere else.
[Guest]: And so if a new person is getting access to that room, so maybe something like…
[Amit Varma]: But because it's fundamentally better constructed and better quality of life, it would be more expensive.
[Unknown]: It will be.
[Amit Varma]: The guy with 100 rupees in his pocket who could have come and just landed up in a slum won't be able to do so anymore.
[Guest]: Absolutely not. So good cities try to develop things where even if you're just coming in for a week,
[Guest]: are there places where you can go to where you can stay for this just a week?
[Guest]: And the place is, you know, good enough for you to live a week and sort of manage,
[Guest]: but bad enough that you want to leave as soon as you have the ability to, right?
[Guest]: So if you look at olden days in India, more powerful communities and caste groupings and others
[Guest]: had, you know, their own chow trees and what in Kannada we call chatras in various cities,
[Guest]: where the idea is that if you're a young boy of that community who goes into that city,
[Guest]: you have a natural place to land up before you find a college or a place of work or something.
[Guest]: So now this was self-provided by communities. And obviously this was far from perfect, right?
[Guest]: But that is the spirit of… So if you're a young job seeker from, I don't know, from rural Maharashtra,
[Guest]: from Marathwada, you're coming to Dharavi to find a job. Is there a place where you can do so?
[Guest]: Is there a permanent place where you can maybe live for a week?
[Guest]: You can get access to what kind of jobs that exist.
[Guest]: And then you sort of move in and integrate with Mumbai's economy, right?
[Guest]: So you don't have enough such state provisioned entry access points.
[Guest]: And if the state in India really wants to care about the right to equity, right?
[Guest]: What you're really talking about is access, right?
[Guest]: So the state does have a role to play in this. The question is, what do we really do about it?
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps the role is just getting out of the way and letting whatever situation spring up organically, just…
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, society still needs to provide for a lot of it, right?
[Guest]: Our cities need to care for their migrants, right? Our cities don't.
[Guest]: Our cities are designed in a way such that, you know, if you're the 11 millionth person who walks into Bangalore,
[Guest]: the values and the norms and the systems of Bangalore don't impose themselves on you, right?
[Guest]: So you've come from a village, you will drive the way you might have driven in a village.
[Guest]: But Bangalore, you have to follow different rules now, right?
[Guest]: You go to New York, this is the standard example that every Indian cribs about.
[Guest]: Oh, you go to a foreign city, you stop littering. And oh, we Indians are hypocrites, when we go abroad, we don't litter.
[Guest]: No, we Indians are human beings, right?
[Guest]: So we go to those cities and we conform to the behavior expected in those cities.
[Guest]: Indian cities are terrible at imposing this on people.
[Guest]: No one in New York comes up to you and bullies you into not littering, right?
[Guest]: You just don't do it because that's the norm.
[Guest]: I think if Indian cities can establish these norms better, and this is again a society in action, you know, in concert with the government,
[Guest]: and you allow for better access at every price point, I think our cities will be far healthier.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this reminds me, I went to New York a year and a half back and I stayed with a friend there.
[Amit Varma]: So I went out driving with him. And in the middle of the night, he screamed at me because I jumped a signal.
[Amit Varma]: And there was absolutely no one there. And it's like my muscle memory told me just keep going ahead.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, leaving that aside, so I just want to try summing up the seen and unseen effects of the different kinds of interventions with slums.
[Amit Varma]: So just correct me or elaborate if required.
[Amit Varma]: Intervention number one is you remove the slum from the city and you take it outside.
[Amit Varma]: And the seen effect is that there is no longer that eyesore of the slum in the city.
[Amit Varma]: But the unseen effect would be that all the people who came there, came there for as cheap labor.
[Amit Varma]: For example, they were maidservants or watchmen or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And now those jobs have supply problem because these people have been moved out of the city.
[Amit Varma]: And there is therefore a mismatch which the market had otherwise corrected for.
[Amit Varma]: The slum was essentially the response of the market. It grew organically because it was filling that demand.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the unseen effect that you're killing this.
[Amit Varma]: And the other intervention is that you do in-situ development where again, the seen effect is the same.
[Amit Varma]: That look, it's not an ugly slum. It's a proper building, it's respectable, better quality of life for the people who stay there.
[Amit Varma]: But the unseen effect is that it affects the fact that slums earlier are typically,
[Amit Varma]: if you have a hundred bucks in your pocket or whatever, you come and you manage and you do jugaar.
[Guest]: And that is affected to some extent, maybe not completely, but it's affected to some extent.
[Guest]: Because the people who live in those slums now don't want to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Right, right.
[Guest]: So what was a temporary place of shelter? What was a place in transit?
[Guest]: Suddenly you endowed someone with rights over that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And now they don't want to move. Right. So maybe the answer there is now open up a new slum.
[Guest]: So even here, I just want to add that one of the developments that has happened is smaller such settlements,
[Guest]: instead of having a big apartment complex, take a small plot of land, build five stories over there.
[Guest]: So you house, I don't know, 50 people, but you do many more of these.
[Guest]: The idea being that jobs, especially low end service jobs in Indian cities, are very, very location dependent.
[Guest]: You need to be close by and you also need to be able to search for other such gigs nearby.
[Guest]: Now, with the coming of, you know, app based businesses and so on, the distance and the proximity is weakening,
[Guest]: but still not at the scale that India really needs.
[Guest]: So those things are still important.
[Guest]: But what I'd say is they're still not addressing the fundamental problem.
[Guest]: How do you have more points in the city where people can come in at every single price point?
[Amit Varma]: And there's also the broader philosophical question of urban planning itself, that do you let a city grow organically?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you have to sort of try and plan it and make it more efficient and make, you know, all of that?
[Amit Varma]: And so what are the sort of trade offs involved and what are the lessons we can learn about that
[Amit Varma]: from the interventions that have taken place with regard to slums over the last few decades?
[Guest]: So I'd say, I talk about slums, but cities in general, there's a false dichotomy that's sort of portrayed to you.
[Guest]: That one, there's this grand vision and a grand plan that the government lays down.
[Guest]: And then people and businesses follow like automatons, you know, according to the grand central plan, which enough people have debunked.
[Guest]: The other extreme is that it's all organic, all chaotic, anything happens.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like evolution, right? Change happens at the fringe, not at the center.
[Amit Varma]: Spontaneous order.
[Guest]: Except, you know, cities have so many people trying to do so many very different things at the same time.
[Guest]: The simplest being getting from different starting points, going to different ending points, right?
[Guest]: And this causes congestion, it causes pollution, it causes chaos.
[Guest]: Now, the reason that this is a false dichotomy is that the government always knows when and where development is happening.
[Guest]: Be it building registrations, be it electricity connections, water supply connections, you know, business licenses.
[Guest]: So government always has a handle that, hey, you know, here's where real estate is heating up.
[Guest]: Here is where more businesses are opening up and so on.
[Guest]: And that has been properly gamed by those who can play that game.
[Guest]: So the standard refrain in Bangalore is, oh, we had no idea Bangalore would grow so rapidly.
[Guest]: No, you had a clue month on month, day on day where what was happening, right?
[Guest]: So if around electronic city in Bangalore, you had more businesses coming up, people knew that this is where the action was happening.
[Guest]: This is where the big apartments were coming up.
[Guest]: So maybe this is where the slums are also coming up.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, the data was there and people should have known, but did people know?
[Guest]: Those who could profit from it knew and did profit from it.
[Guest]: I mean, cities in India are a real estate game, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the values appreciate and then someone seeks rent off of it.
[Guest]: So that enough rent has been sought, right?
[Guest]: So people know, except it's a standard sort of hand-wringing excuse that government officials like to give.
[Guest]: So I think what planning should be is responsive.
[Guest]: Paul Romer, the economist, had this idea that the single biggest element of planning in a city for a government is acquisition of land.
[Guest]: Supposing you know that the city is going to expand in a particular direction, go leap ahead of time and buy a piece of land somewhere.
[Guest]: That can be a bus station tomorrow.
[Guest]: That can be a railway station tomorrow, a metro hub, something, right?
[Guest]: Good cities have worked where public sector agencies and city governments have created land banks for themselves, which they've acquired intelligently.
[Guest]: They've compensated people well and then deployed these assets well much later.
[Guest]: Because if you haven't bought a plan ahead of time and private parties have bought all of it, that's your single biggest problem in defining a city.
[Guest]: The fundamental problem with a city is that any of the choices that you and I make with how our housing is done, how our layouts are done, we have locked ourselves in for 70 to 150 years.
[Guest]: So in terms of liberty, that's your trade-off, right?
[Guest]: The action that you take impinges on the liberty of people to five generations below you.
[Amit Varma]: So historically, which would be the cities in the world that have most, that have been closest to achieving this balance?
[Guest]: I'd say it's not a static thing.
[Guest]: Clearly, cities like New York are well planned now.
[Guest]: The city of London is something that is completely reinvented itself time and again.
[Amit Varma]: And cities had this thing.
[Guest]: They had fire, they had pestilence, they had plague, war, all these reasons where you had destruction happening and new things coming out after that.
[Guest]: Indian cities have the burden of growing up under a nuclear umbrella.
[Guest]: We have not had war ruin our cities in the last 100 years.
[Guest]: That's a great thing.
[Guest]: Don't get me wrong.
[Guest]: But we've not had a chance to rebuild any of our cities as a result of it.
[Guest]: Most modern European cities today are modern because they got rebuilt 50, 60 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: So are you saying that kind of modernity is impossible for cities like Bombay and Bangalore?
[Guest]: It's extra hard.
[Guest]: Doing redevelopment of a city that's already broken is extra hard.
[Guest]: The political economy is that much tougher.
[Guest]: That's why governments also find it easier to build a city in the desert.
[Guest]: So you look at these great plans on the Delhi-Mumbai infrastructure corridor, Jiffy Pop cities springing out of the desert.
[Guest]: Who knows where the people are, where the water is?
[Guest]: Nothing but the road we'll build and then the city will come.
[Guest]: So it's hard, but we have to do it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not impossible.
[Amit Varma]: And to go back to the issue of slums and to sort of wind up the episode, the scene effects of slums is that,
[Amit Varma]: A, they're dirty, very poor standard of living, they're an eyesore in the city and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the other scene effect is that they're hotbeds for entrepreneurship and there's so much energy and jogar happening in slums.
[Amit Varma]: And the unseen effect, which you pointed out, is that slums are necessary for the evolution of a city
[Amit Varma]: because they are where poor migrants who don't have resources can actually enter the city and contribute to its economy and become part of it.
[Amit Varma]: So given this unseen effect, which hasn't really struck me before this,
[Amit Varma]: how would you say policymakers should look at slums differently?
[Guest]: I think they should be looking at slums not as regions, but as access points.
[Guest]: And these access points change from time to time.
[Guest]: An old slum becomes gentrified.
[Guest]: The people who are living there have now become permanent settlers over there.
[Guest]: So the mix of new entrance to current residence changes.
[Guest]: So slums are access points.
[Guest]: They're not black spots.
[Guest]: They're not hubs of bad infrastructure.
[Guest]: They're just entry points into the city.
[Guest]: So the old Indian cities of the fortified cities had the darwazas, right?
[Guest]: You have the Ajmer Darwaza and the Kashmir Gate and so on.
[Guest]: Slums are the real gates into the cities.
[Amit Varma]: That's how policymakers should be thinking about them.
[Amit Varma]: So all around you, when you go out on the streets, there are unseen gates.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, thanks so much for being on the show.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: One person's slum is another person's window of opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to check out some of Pawan's writing, do go over to the online magazine Pragati at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan is a contributing writer there and I'm the editor.
[Amit Varma]: Also check out my blog IndiaUncut at IndiaUncut.com and follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: That's Verma with an A. A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And if you enjoyed the guitar at the start of the show, that was my producer, Josh Thomas.
[Amit Varma]: Until next week then. Ciao.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: Amit Verma will be talking to Pranay Kotastine about China's growing presence in Asia.
[Unknown]: For more, go to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The Unseen, check out another great show by IVM Podcasts, Made in India,
[Amit Varma]: hosted by my friend May Thomas, where every week she profiles up-and-coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. This is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry. Food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out IVM Podcasts to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over. Thank you.